[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> My name is Mitch Horowitz.
I am a historian,
writer, and seeker
in alternative spirituality.
I got into this work
as a little kid.
I was growing up in
the borough of Queens
in New York City
in the 1970s and I
was fascinated with folklore,
superstition, ghost stories,
astrology.
And I wanted to know, where
did these ideas come from?
How did they enter our culture?
How did they reach
my childhood home
from the civilizations
of ancient Egypt,
Babylonian Greece, Rome?
And what path did they travel?
How did they get interrupted?
How did they get changed?
So starting from when I
was just a little kid,
I wanted to know the
answers to these things.
I wanted to peel back
the onion on all this.
And I was very blessed
to be able to carry
that search into adulthood
as a writer, as a historian,
as a seeker.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
Part of my work is the
work of verification.
I think, not only can you
write as a critical historian
about movements and figures
that you place some belief in,
but, in fact, most of our
historical writing, most
of our critical writing
about world religions
comes from people who are
believers within those belief
systems.
I wrote "Occult
America" because I
was working with the ideas of
many different occult thinkers
and experimenters
and I didn't think
that their lives were being
captured or understood
in the prevailing
historical literature.
I'm thinking of people like
Madam HP Blavatsky, Paul Foster
Case, Edward Casey, Manly
P. Hall-- the great occult
scholar.
It seemed to me that
these people really
stood for something.
There was something in their
lives that required defending.
They wanted to take esoteric,
and ancient, and hermetic
religious ideas and
turn them into sources
of practical insight and wisdom
within the day-to-day life
of the ordinary person.
If New Age spirituality or
alternative spirituality
stands for anything,
it's that the spiritual
can be therapeutic.
That there are practical
methods and insights and ideas
that can deepen the experience
and improve the experience
of the individual.
When occult figures are
written about in mainstream
historical works, first
of all, when is a rarity.
Very often, they're either
ignored, they're looked past,
or they're just
momentarily depicted
as being these fringe
oddball figures
who might have had a regrettable
influence at some earlier
or less sophisticated
time in our national life,
but who could safely be
relegated to a museum case
somewhere and ignored.
Most mainstream
historians, for example,
have no idea what to make of
a figure like Madam Blavatsky
They think of her some
huckster or carnival performer.
They don't know where to look.
And even if you could
show them where to look,
they're bored with the topic.
They don't want to look there.
So for example, Mahatma Gandhi
in his letters and diaries
was very plain about the
fact that Madam Blavatsky
as a person and
theosophy as a principle
had an enormous formative effect
on the Indian independence
movement.
India today is the largest
democracy in the world.
Gandhi traced his
earliest influences back
to Madam Blavatsky.
This gets lost within
mainstream history
because mainstream
historians are
trained in a kind of
conformist mindset--
as we all are--
to regard certain
things as serious.
Certain things is nonsense.
And it dawned on me that the
esoteric and occult subculture
was going to lose its
own history unless it
wrote its own history.
You can't depend upon
historians from other fields who
may be very indifferent to
some of these movements who
don't have any
understanding of the values,
and practices, and
ideals of these movements
to write that history for you.
It will not happen.
It will be forgotten.
Or it will be written about
in a very caricatured way.
So I saw that need in
the historical literature
that the occult subcultures
and the figures behind them
were either being ignored
or being misunderstood.
And my conviction
was and remains
that something in their lives
was really worth defending.
They stood for something.
And I wanted to capture
their own intellectual
and spiritual search,
as well as their foibles
and their failures of
which, there were many.
But they were great
successes, as well.
There were great
acts of integrity.
And I wanted to capture
that full picture
so that's what I attempted
in "Occult America."
In the here and now, I'm very
interested in New Thought,
which is the spiritual
philosophy that grew out
of the New England
mental healing
movement in the
late 19th century.
New Thought is sometimes,
known as the power
of positive thinking.
I'm very interested in the
question of whether thoughts
are causative.
And I answer that question
in the affirmative,
but that still leaves open so
many mysteries and questions
that build upon one another.
How are they causative?
Why are they causative?
In what circumstances
can my thoughts actually
affect and rearrange
reality, and experience,
and physicality?
And in what circumstances
does that not work?
The problem with New
Thought is that it's
failed to grow intellectually
so that we think of New Thought
principles, of positive mind
principles as things that
belong on refrigerator magnets
or inspirational page a day
calendars.
But in fact, New Thought ideas--
the question of the
minds influence--
is-- for me--
the most radical
question facing humanity
of say, the past 150 years.
I think within our generation
and within the folds of things
that we're discovering today
in fields like neuroplasticity,
placebo studies,
and quantum physics,
we are encountering
ideas about the mind that
are going to change our
conception of what it means
to be human, as much
as Darwinism change
that conception in
the Victorian Age.
That's unfolding right now
within our own generation.
And the pioneers of New Thought
had a very early instinct
for all of the things that
are being validated today
in the fields that I
just mentioned and more.
That we're learning
about right now.
But that movement failed
to grow intellectually.
It became very successful
as a popular literature
so today, people are
familiar with "The Power
of Positive Thinking," "Law of
Attraction," and "The Secret."
It succeeded as a
popular literature,
but it did not succeed as a
serious intellectual movement
that really turned its own
questions back on itself
and deepened and
further detailed
some of its premises and ideas.
So that's what I'm trying to do.
William James was doing
this when he died in 1910.
He was experimenting
with mind power
methods for the last
decade of his life.
And he took all of
this very seriously,
but there weren't
many people that
followed in his wake that looked
seriously at the challenge
that thoughts are causative
in a really sustained way.
So I'm trying to do that.
And I try to do it in
a very practical way.
I love the practical
New Thought literature.
I don't try to sway
people from reading it.
My encouragement is read
it, experiment with it.
There's so much there.
But we also have to
go further with it
and ask ourselves questions.
The chief one is, do we live
under one mental super law?
Or do we live under
many causes and forces
of which that is one part?
That's something that I'm
working with right now.
There are so many
interesting questions
about what creates reality.
We're on our knees
looking through a keyhole
and we may never get more
than a keyhole picture of it
during this lifetime.
But there are fascinating
questions-- for example--
about whether events that
we experience as linear
are really linear after all.
In quantum physics, there's a
theory called the many worlds
theories, which
proposes that there
are infinite numbers of
outcomes going on around us
all the time, but we experience
a limited conception of reality
through our sensory organs.
And we experience these
things in a linear fashion.
When, in fact,
they're there going on
in this infinite
circuitous fashion
that can't be mapped
out on a line chart.
William James reasoned
in 1902, that the mystic
is like a microscope.
That when the mystic
looks at something
as through a microscope,
you're seeing
all kinds of things going on.
You're seeing
cellular structure.
You're seeing molecules.
You're seeing atoms.
You're seeing space
between things.
But when you pan back--
as with a camera--
you're getting less
and less detail.
So the coarseness of
our sensory organs
might not be sufficient
to really take
in everything that's going on.
But the quantum
physicist, the person
looking through a microscope,
the astronomer looking
through a nuclear
telescope-- might be seeing
things that are going on.
The mystic who has a
heightened intuitive ability
might be seeing things
that are going on
in ways that we don't take in
our normal day-to-day life.
So my challenge and the thing
that I'm trying to work with
is whether linear events as we
experience them exist at all.
Or whether, in fact, by the
very nature of our thoughts,
we're not manifesting
things, necessarily,
but we are selecting things.
Which is why it's so
important for the individual
to have some sense of
awareness of the thoughts
that are going on in his or
her head, which are nonstop.
We all have these running
dialogues occurring, not only
every waking moment, but
in our sleep, as well.
It's possible.
And I think generations
of mystics study,
as well as things that have
gone on in contemporary science,
suggests to us that
the mind is not only
a tool of cognitive and motor
function, but may be actually,
selecting events--
which is something that has just
been suggested, that we've just
gotten a hint of in the past
80 years of quantum physics
experiments.
So I think that's a tremendous
challenge facing our generation
right now.
And one of the things
I'm working on right now
is trying to come up with
a theory of positive mind
mechanics-- if it works.
And I think that we've seen
enough evidence to suggest it
does, and we know it
does-- for example--
in placebo studies.
If it works, why does it work?
What's the mechanism?
It may not just be one thing.
There may be changes in
the body-- for example--
and we may be able to
measure these changes
and say, well, look, the
placebo effect in the body
is the stimulation of the
reward center in the brain.
Or it's the release
of endorphins.
Or it's a strengthening of
the immunological system.
Well, it may be all those
things, but keep in mind,
those things may be
effects and not causes.
That may be what the spiritual
appeal looks like in the body.
Part of our limitation
in our intellectual study
is we find something that's
going on, we verify it,
and we assume that's the
only thing that's going on.
That might be what prayer
looks like in the body.
That might be what
mental causation
looks like in the body.
So I'm trying to broaden
our sense of what's really
happening in life and how it may
be much broader than what we've
been brought up to assume.
All of us as
individuals, all the time
are facing ethical decisions
and ethical dilemmas.
And these things
have both material
and metaphysical
dimensions to them.
The person who says to
me, is the government
or some secret agency
using all these bad devices
to manipulate things?
The question I would put back to
that person is, do you gossip?
Do you keep your word?
Are you a good
person to live with?
What would your spouse or
your boyfriend or girlfriend
say if I were to
put that question?
I'm not trying to
judge the individual
and I direct these questions
to myself, as well.
We have an enormous range
of ethical decisions
to make in our personal
life all day, every day.
Look at online banter.
It's filled with cynicism.
It's filled with people
being humiliated.
It's filled with
people being insulted.
So much of our
entertainment is based
on denigrating other people,
whether it's political talk
shows.
Whether it's so-called,
reality television.
We, as a culture,
take great glee
in seeing people humiliated.
You want to look for evil
forces, look right there.
I'm infinitely less
concerned about things
that are supposedly
going on somewhere
in the halls of power,
than I am concerned
about the coarseness, and the
anger, and the denigrating tone
that is found online.
I get hate mail
all the time when
I say something nice
about Freemasonry
or the historic Illuminati.
I think those
organizations have actually
been wonderful influences.
The Illuminati as
it really existed--
not in some fantasy,
but as it existed
upon its founding
in Bavaria in 1776
was filled with radical
humanitarian principles.
A belief in separation
of church and state.
A belief that rank and
status should not be
conferred upon an individual
by his accident of birth.
A belief in some kind
of social polity--
free schools, free hospitals.
These were aspects of
Illuminati philosophy.
Aspects of Rosicrucian
philosophy.
Aspects of Freemasonic
And as these things influenced--
especially coming through
Freemasonry--
some of America's founders,
including George Washington,
Paul Revere, Ben
Franklin-- these
were wonderful influences.
So I view Freemasonry
as having been
a very positive influence on
the development of our culture.
A very positive
influence on the ethic
of religious plurality
and freedom as it
has existed in America.
And I think that when
people are looking
for storylines or ideas
about secret societies
having some kind of
sinister influence
within our government
today, they're
looking in precisely,
the wrong place.
They should be
looking at influences
that course through them.
Influences that they are on
the lives of other people.
Do we ever stop to
ask other people
or to consider what other
people's experiences are of me?
Of us?
Whether we are
helping or hurting?
Whether we are there
for other people?
Whether we keep our word?
I think the most radical
mystical exercise
that any individual
can undertake, even
in the space of one hour,
is keeping his or her word.
If you can't keep your word,
then you can't ultimately
be responsible for anything.
There's something sacred
about keeping your word.
It will change your life.
It will change the lives
of people around you.
I guarantee that.
But we rarely look
at things like that
and we're more apt
to look at what
I consider complete fantasies
about conspiratorial
organizations that are pulling
strings and controlling things.
Again, I would turn that
right back on the questioner
and ask him, how
in his private life
he's carrying out the
principles that he thinks are
being violated somewhere else?
Bring it back home--
that's my challenge.
Positive mind philosophy is
really, the American creed.
There's so much talk
of division these days,
but if there's one philosophy
that really unites everybody
across political
and religious lines,
it's this idea that your
thoughts, your attitude,
your self-image play
an intimate role
in what actually happens to
you in day-to-day experience.
You will find the
positive mind idea
running the gamut from
New Age spiritual centers,
to evangelical churches,
to high schools in Harlem.
And I have been to them all.
And you could parachute down
in any one of these places
and if you've had a
moment where there's
been an inspirational book or
inspirational idea coming out
of the positive thinking
movement that's touched you
and you meet someone else
has had the same experience,
you will find this
tremendous intimate bond
that you have with
that person right away.
Americans, more than any
other people or culture today,
think in terms of our minds
as a causative instrument.
That's new-- that's new.
There was always a manners and
morals literature in America,
in the American colonies,
going back to Ben Franklin
and before.
But it was really in
the mid-19th century
with the movement called
transcendentalism,
with the mental
healing movement,
that Americans began to grok to
the idea that what you think,
that your attitude is an
actual engine of experience.
And you'll find that outlook
in other parts of the world,
but I can guarantee you in
Moscow, or Paris, or London,
people are going to
look at you funny
if you say that, unless
they specifically,
have cultivated their own
interests in these beliefs.
But in almost any
place in America--
small town, inner city, place
of wealth, a place of want--
you will find people
agreeing with that attitude.
That unites all of us.
So you can't really tell
the story of America
without understanding the story
of positive mind metaphysics
because it is the back
story of our country.
It doesn't make us
innocent of everything.
It doesn't mean that
there haven't been
grotesque departures from it.
But you can't understand
the American mindset
without understanding the
positive thinking mindset.
They're married.
"Mind as Builder" is
a new book that I've
done on the positive mind
philosophy of Edgar Cayce.
Cayce was a medical
clairvoyant who
lived in the first half
of the 20th century.
He would go into
trance states and he
would diagnose and
prescribe cures
for diseases of people
he had never met-- often,
who were many, many miles away.
And there's a record of more
than 14,000 trance readings
that Cayce gave this way.
And in many cases, people claim
that they had positive results.
Cayce also had a set of
psychological teachings.
He used the expression, the
spiritual is the life, the mind
is the builder, the
physical is the result.
So Cayce shared in this idea
that thoughts are causative.
That thoughts make things
happen physically in our lives,
contributing to illness.
Contributing to relationships.
Contributing to happiness.
But Cayce had an
interesting outlook--
which is one that I share--
which is, again, people get
very hung up on this question--
I've thought positively.
I've used affirmations.
I've used visualizations.
And I got sick, what went wrong?
What did I do wrong?
And my outlook is you
didn't do anything wrong.
The fact is we have misled
ourselves and we have misused
these teachings-- at times--
by rushing to the
hasty conclusion
that the mind
controls everything.
Why is that outlook necessary?
I can believe in the
law of attraction.
I can practice the idea
that thoughts are causative.
And that is a very sacred
central belief in my life,
but it doesn't mean that
it needs to be exclusive.
It doesn't mean that it's the
only thing that's going on.
So that if people are caught
up in catastrophic events--
whether it's an
earthquake in Haiti,
or monsoon in the Philippines,
or 9/11 in New York City--
I don't think we should ever
talk about events like that
as though we really understand
them from a mental perspective,
unless, first of all, we've been
through those things ourselves.
The only empiricism that we
have on the spiritual path
is from within.
What's my own experience?
What's my own conduct?
What's been the
result of my thoughts?
Inner experience really is
the data and the empiricism
of the spiritual path.
So first of all, I
think it's important
not to talk in some self-certain
way about the kinds of events
that we've never been through.
Many people who live in
America, who live in the West
have never been through
catastrophes on that scale.
And I think if one
judges people who
have been through
those catastrophes
as though their minds were
vibrating on that level
or something like that,
that's just throwing a stone.
That's just presuming that
my neighbor did something
to bring this upon himself.
And I don't believe that.
So I find that challenge
within Cayce's teachings,
within his positive
mind philosophy.
Cayce taught that we do
live under very concrete
physical laws--
mortality alone tells us that.
These bodies decline.
These bodies go away.
That is an indelible fact.
So to say that
everything is mind,
I don't think is
quite sufficient.
It doesn't take away from
the challenge of the law
of attraction, it enriches it.
Because what happens is people
approach these mind power
philosophies and maybe events go
exactly the opposite than what
they are visualizing.
And then, they feel guilty,
and they feel dejected,
and they want to
drift away, or they
get angry or what have you.
None of that needs to happen.
We can ask ourselves what
myriad array of forces
are we experiencing?
And if-- if--
mind is the ultimate reality--
and I believe that may be true,
that may very well be true--
we also have to remember
that laws and forces can
be felt very inconsistently
based on our vantage point.
Gravity is a law.
We understand that
gravity operates
under certain principles
that are constant.
But you're going to
experience gravity
very differently on the moon--
for example-- than
you would on Jupiter.
On the moon, you can
jump 10 feet in the air.
On Jupiter, you would
be so heavy that you
would be crushed
under your own weight
because there are
also laws of mass.
There's greater mass and there's
a greater gravitational force.
It's the same law going on.
It's the ultimate
truth, but we're
going to experience different
ways based on our vantage
point.
So I want people to
be free to experiment
with and use these
ideas without feeling
limited by this A plus B equals
C equation, where oh gee,
if I don't experience C,
I did something wrong.
You didn't do anything
wrong, you're experimenting.
So I use Cayce's teachings
as a jumping off point
to try to expand our
ideas of how we can use
the positive mind philosophy.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
I try to say the
same thing wherever
I go, which is that it is a
basic human question-- maybe,
the basic human question--
to ask, what is it
around the next corner?
What is it just over that hill?
What's going on over there?
I want to understand
how things work
and where things come from.
And I'm attracted to esoteric
and alternative spirituality
because those spiritual
movements more
than any other in modern life
have presented practical ideas
and methods to the individual.
And if my work
can help people, I
hope it will give them
a sense of options.
I hope it will give
them a sense of freedom
to experiment with these things.
I hope that if they've
had a disappointment
in their experiments,
they can realize
that that disappointment
is not something that they
should blame themselves for.
Or is not reason to
pack up their bags
and go somewhere else.
But stick around.
Stay with us.
That disappointment is part
of a lifelong experiment.
That's the beauty
of your existence.
We are here-- if we're
here for anything--
to be generative, to
experiment, to probe.
So how can you have
experimentation
without a null
experiment at some point?
Without what looks like
a failure at some point?
That may be the stepping
stone to some extraordinary
discovery, including
a discovery that
could help the search
of other people
because we need to find out
under what conditions do
certain spiritual ideas work?
Under what conditions do
they not seem to work?
I want people to be practical.
I want people to be probing.
I want people to
be experimental.
And above all, I want people
to be civil, and meticulous,
and decorous in how
they think and how
they talk to one
another because that
has enormous impact
on your experience.